The celebrated author Salman Rushdie is
someone who has lived with risk and
threat for decades. Back in 1989, he was
forced into hiding when one of his
novels was accused of being against
Islam. His life changed overnight. Over
the years though, it seemed that the
threat had receded, that the worst was
over. Until in 2022, he was on stage at
an event in New York when a man rushed
onto that stage and stabbed him multiple
times. He was nearly killed that day.
But he got back to work, to writing, and
he now has a new book out, The Eleventh
Hour, which is a collection of short
stories.
He's been talking to me about art and
life, families and free speech, and the
three countries he's called home, India,
Britain, and the United States.
Here's my conversation with Salman
Rushdie for the Michelle Hussein Show.
>> [music]
>> Salman Rushdie, welcome. Thank you. Your
new book is your second published since
the awful day on that stage in New York
where you came close to losing your
life. So, I feel I really want to start
by asking how you're doing. I'm okay,
thank you. I'm surprisingly okay. I
I found that doctors inspecting me were
constantly telling me that I shouldn't
be so well as if I was doing something
wrong.
But no, I've I've made a pretty good
recovery. But it was a hard road. I
think that's clear because in your last
book, Knife, you write about the
life-changing injuries that you've
sustained.
>> Yeah, I mean, you know, there were a lot
of injuries and they were very close to
killing me.
So, the recovery was yeah, it took a
long time.
Do you think it changed you that day?
I mean, only in certain ways. I mean, I
think
if you
are given if you like
an extra lease of life, you know, um
it makes you see every day as
as kind of a blessing, you know, every
day is a
luxury.
And it also gives gives me the sense of
even more than before, don't waste your
time.
If you've been given some extra time,
use it. It's interesting to hear you say
the word blessing cuz you're famously
not a man of faith.
>> No, no, I I
this is an entirely secular blessing.
But psychologically, do you feel it
comes back to you or have you turned the
page?
>> Not anymore. I mean, I think the thing
about PTSD
is that that's a classic symptom of PTSD
is to replay the the event.
And I mean, I guess there was a bit of
that at the beginning. But um I mean,
it's been
getting on for 3 and 1/2 years now and
it's a long long I mean, I think it's
long enough to have dealt with it. As
you came round and were conscious of
your circumstances again, did you think
Were you thinking in in words on the
page?
>> I was thinking I don't want to write
about it. Because it was too traumatic.
>> Yeah, I just thought I would have
that's the last thing I want to do.
And then I understood that it was
impossible for me to write anything else
until I'd
dealt with it.
And I just understood that the only way
past it was to go through it. And and so
then I thought, yeah, I better write
about it.
>> So, it was a form of therapy then, that
book?
>> Well, it was a form of dealing with it.
Yes, I don't know I don't I don't like
the idea of writing as therapy. I think
writing writing is writing and therapy
is therapy. Yeah. But it certainly made
me feel
ownership, you know, like taking charge
of it rather than simply being
a victim lying on the ground bleeding,
you know, it became my story that I was
telling in my way. Yeah.
You have talked though about writing as
a form of optimism. Was
that it's a positive act and that you
you hope it it's an act of hope?
>> Yes, I think all writing is that, you
know, you sit alone
for
anything or sometimes for years
and and you hope that what you produce
is going to
be valuable to people, you know, or
enjoyable to people. But at least people
will respond well to it, but you have no
idea, you
And so that that requires optimism. I
think I think all writing in that sense
is it is born out of a sort of optimism.
And you have been writing for more than
50 years.
>> Yeah, it's getting it's up there.
Was it a lonely road at first when
you're trying to get your first novel
published? And then that first novel
didn't do as well as you hoped. To say
the least.
>> [laughter]
>> I mean, You made up for it later, so I
think we can talk about it.
>> I mean, there was, you know, a lot of my
contemporaries
like Ian McEwan and Martin Amis and
Julian Barnes, you know, they were all
taking off like rockets, you know, their
early 20s producing work which
immediately established their voice.
And I was stumbling around.
And it took me a while to find
my direction. You know, and
and in a way I found it by going back to
childhood. Uh and and when I started
writing what became Midnight's Children,
I I was really thinking I just want to
write a novel about childhood.
But your childhood was in India and it
ended up being a story of India
therefore.
>> Yeah, and then at some point
the history came pouring in and it
became a much larger scale of book, and
it took me it took me like over 5 years
to write because in a way I was learning
how to write it while I was writing it.
And
the the idea that you've lived in these
multiple places, you've lived across
three continents, you've called Britain,
India, and now the United States your
home. I think all of these themes are
present in your work throughout, whether
it's fiction or non-fiction. Yeah, I
mean, I think, you know, sometimes I
envy those writers who are deeply rooted
in one place,
you know, and can spend a lifetime
drawing on that on that one place. I
mean, William Faulkner, for example, you
know, um Oxford, Mississippi, this tiny
place.
And yet it was enough for him to have a
lifetime of masterpieces.
And
that's not been my experience because
I've moved around. Yeah. But then, you
know, you lose something, you gain
something. And and I think it's helped
me
to have a a wider vision
of the world. And I think it's there
certainly in your latest book, The
Eleventh Hour, which is a collection of
short stories, not all of them the same
length, some some a bit longer.
Um again, that sense of people and
places that have influenced you. One of
the ones that interested me is Late,
which it's pretty clear is set in the
place where you went to university back
in the 1960s.
>> university is not named and the college
is not named, but it's pretty obvious
where King's College, Cambridge.
>> Yes.
And why go back to that period?
>> always wanted to, you know, but I'd
never really found the story.
Um and
because it was a good time for me. I
mean, it was a
a happy time for me, university, you
know, I'd never written about it. So,
and then
two things happened sort of squashed
together. One was my memory of having
briefly encountered
the great E.M. Forster, who was in
residence at the college. He was an
honorary fellow of King's.
And and he was very nice to me,
especially when he found out that I had
an Indian background because India was
so important to him.
You meet him in the 1960s, which is
what, 40 years after he's published A
Passage to India. He's an academic at
Cambridge. [clears throat]
>> This endless silence. He never wrote
another novel after Passage to India.
What did he say to you about writing?
Well, he was encouraging. I mean, I very
shyly
admitted that I was kind of hoping that
I would write something.
And he was very sweet and generous about
it and said that, you know, he thought
that that was good. He thought that the
good book about India would probably be
written by somebody from India
but with knowledge of Western
literature, you know,
so
I mean, for a 19-year-old kid, or you
know, it was enormously
gratifying to have that kind of
benediction. You fitted the bill. I
fitted his bill, yes, whatever that is.
Um so, that was one thing and the other
thing was my I mean, I never met Alan
Turing, but I of course he was another
enormously important
fellow
person from King's, graduate of King's.
And both of them
had suffered quite seriously because of
their homosexuality. They were both very
badly treated
and damaged by the fact that it was
illegal in England and um
so on and and so I thought
that was something to consider and so I
thought if I just kind of squashed them
both into the same character,
which will become my character, there'll
be a third character who isn't really
either of them, then it's a way of
talking about all of that.
>> Yeah, and there's a sort of avenging of
the injustices that they went through,
which is part of your story.
>> Yes, it's it's strangely talked at First
of all, I wasn't expecting it to be a
ghost story.
And secondly, I wasn't expecting it to
be a revenge ghost story.
It just grew that way. Is that the way
that you write then? You sit down and
you're not sure how the story's going to
end.
>> Well, you have some sense of it, but not
a detailed sense, you know, I mean, what
I thought it was going to be
was a story about an improbable
friendship between this elderly
gentleman and this young Indian woman
student, you know, who had the love of
India in common.
And I thought it's going to be about
this improbable friendship between the
two of them.
And then when I started writing it, this
I just found myself typing the sentence
in which I killed him in the first
sentence.
You know, when he woke up that morning,
he was dead. And I thought, where'd that
come from?
And then I had to think about it. And
then I thought, okay, so
it's still going to be about an
improbable friendship, but one of the
people is dead.
But again, does that mean that you don't
do a plan of the story or if it's a
novel, you don't chart out chapters in
advance?
>> to. I used to be very
architectural about it, you know, I used
to need I needed to have quite a
detailed structure.
But as it's gone on,
that's kind of changed. I mean, of
course you have some structure, you
know, you have to have know what you're
writing about and why you're writing it
and and it goes from here to here and
there are these various points along the
way that
it needs to touch on.
But I
more and more see it as a process of
discovery. You know, you write
you you write the story to find out what
story you're writing. Yeah. And then is
there a moment when you know that your
instinct has been right because
>> Yeah, and it's also sometimes wrong. You
know, sometimes you go down blind alleys
and you have to have the
mental toughness to say no, that's not
right.
Cancel that, go another way. Does that
mean dropping a story entirely? Does
that Does that mean they're unfinished
fragments or do you just redo and you
make it right?
>> it. Okay. With an editor or with your
own instinct?
>> Uh I don't I don't I can't show people
unfinished work.
So what I mean by finished is when I
think I can't make it any better.
Then I get very interested in in
editorial input. And how do you respond
to an editor saying you could make this
better this way?
>> much better at it.
But you weren't at the beginning.
>> [laughter]
>> at the beginning.
So well, we'll take us back to
Midnight's Children then.
>> Well, there was a
the most important editorial
contributions, both of which I accepted.
There was an extra character. And you
know, in in Midnight's Children, Saleem
is
theoretically telling the story to this
uh person who works in the same pickle
factory called Padma.
And so it's both an oral narrative and a
written narrative. And and initially
there was a second audience
And
people at at Jonathan Cape as it was who
read it all said you don't need that
second figure. You know, you you only
need one.
And so then eventually I agreed to have
a go at removing the second figure and
it proved so easy to remove that it was
clear that they were right. Mhm. But you
seem to have struggled with it at the
>> initially I thought, no.
What are you talking about?
And the second thing was there was a
moment in the in the sort of about 2/3
of the way through the novel
where the timeline got a bit scrambled.
Where I jumped forward and then back and
then forward again.
And basically, Liz Calder who was my
editor said, just, you know,
keep the chronology, you know, tell it
in in sequence.
And again, she was right. So that So
there were So I did even then accept
very important pieces of editorial
contribution.
>> And that was the book that was
life-changing for you that made you
famous overnight when you won the Booker
Prize for it in 1981. I still want to go
back in time though because
saying while you were still at
university to E.M. Forster that you
wanted to be a writer.
>> Mhm.
I know a bit about the kind of family
environment you would have grown up in
even though we're a generation apart,
there's a connection
>> There certainly is. between us.
I might as well spell it out now. Your
mother and my grandmother were sisters.
Yes, and your mother is my first cousin.
With whom you spent time in your growing
up years when you both spent time in the
same family house.
>> Yes. Um
your grandparents' house, but the reason
I'm interested in the writing side of it
is that from what I know of that
environment, wouldn't wasn't there an
emphasis on being a
professional of a different kind, a
doctor or a lawyer or an engineer? Yes,
my father was not pleased when I said I
wanted to write books.
I remember what he said, he said, "What
will I tell my friends?"
>> [laughter]
>> And fortunately, he lived long enough
for his friends to call him up and
congratulate him.
But that's not because he
you know, the these are literate people
who enjoy consuming writing, but it's a
question of how you're going to support
yourself.
>> Yeah, I mean, writing's not a real job.
You know,
it's a hobby. So what gave you the
courage to think, no, I'm really going
to have a go at this?
>> Well, I guess I really wanted to do it,
you know. I I think if I look back at
that young fellow,
he had real determination cuz it took me
a long time, you know, when I graduated
from Cambridge in 1968.
And Midnight's Children came out in
1981.
So that was almost 13 years of
get No, not getting there
before I did get there. And I think that
that determination, you know,
retrospectively, I'm quite proud of it.
Yeah.
Uh it's either a short time or a long
time depending on [laughter] the way you
look at it. It's a relatively short time
for the success you've had subsequently.
>> Well, but everybody else was doing much
better than me.
And you were conscious of that
competitive
>> Well, I mean, you know, you you're aware
of what your generation is doing.
>> [snorts]
>> I think. Yeah. And then
again, to the environment that shaped
you in India as you're growing up in
Bombay in the 1950s, [snorts]
um I know your father read you stories,
but
your mother, my great-aunt who I
remember very well,
I feel that she and her sisters were
also part of an unusual generation where
for women of their time, they were
thinking about careers, they were not
going to be in purdah, they were not
going to live the same way their mother
did.
>> were very open-minded. You know, and and
brought us up in that way.
You know, we we were not we were brought
up in a very what I suppose you would
call liberal atmosphere.
And very largely secular atmosphere.
You know, wasn't wasn't an enormous
amount of religion in our house. Mhm.
And that was that was a tone that was
then set for the for the rest of your
life. Did it give you a certain freedom?
Yeah, because we didn't I mean, you
know, maybe my father would take me to
Eid prayers once a year.
That was about it. Mhm. Um and I didn't
understand them. Of course, I don't
speak any Arabic.
>> [snorts]
>> Um
I'd just go up and down when he'd go up
and down and that was what he instructed
me to do.
But Urdu Mhm. was your mother tongue.
>> Actually, as it was mine as well because
I was also spoken to only in Urdu in the
first [snorts] few years of my life.
What is it still present in your life
somewhere?
>> I still speak Urdu. Mhm.
I mean, what would happen in the in
childhood was that I mean, I went to a
school which was in which was an English
medium school
in Bombay, Cathedral School.
So at school, we would speak English,
but when we got home,
I mean, my mother would tend to speak to
us in Urdu.
Uh so we were brought up in that way.
Mhm.
And what was the influence of your
grandparents' home,
>> [snorts]
>> which I tried to track down in northern
India some years ago, but it already
been pulled down by then.
>> demolished, yeah.
In you know, in Aligarh, which is this
university town south of Delhi,
they had this rather beautiful old-style
Indian courtyard house house.
And
like a couple of times a year, there
would be like family gatherings where
you know, my mother,
her two sisters, her two brothers,
and their children
would all gather at at at the
grandparents' house.
And we would I mean, I can remember we
would perform little plays, children
would perform little plays for the
entertainment of the adults.
And we would all sleep on the roof on
charpoy beds under mosquito nets.
And it was it was kind of rather magical
that house. Mhm.
Uh and it was where we because, you
know, some of the family was in Pakistan
and some was in India.
>> [snorts]
>> So that that house became the place
where came together.
Yeah. And I think also because one of
your uncles was in films
and his wife was an actor and a dancer,
this sort of sense of culture and
performance and art of different kinds
is part of your life.
>> in Bombay as
as we did
had this apartment on on Marine Drive
which I remember with great affection
because he was he was like
my favorite uncle of it. He was very
booming and funny and
affectionate and
and and his wife was rather rather
wonderful, too. Um
And so I remember my visits to this
apartment with great pleasure.
It's so interesting hearing you talk
about this cuz I've I've only ever
you know, I I know that this environment
is part of what shaped you know, my
mother as well, but I've always heard
about it secondhand. When you set out to
write Midnight's Children, I know you by
that stage you hadn't been to Bombay or
to India for a long time. So I think you
But I went back. You after it was Oh,
before.
But you were try you spent a lot of time
trying to remember as well the fragments
of
>> Yes, I mean, I think memory is a great
resource, you know, I mean, when you
seriously try and remember, it's amazing
how much comes back.
But now, I did after I've
published my unsuccessful first novel,
I took what little money I'd earned from
it
and went to India for many months
>> [snorts]
>> living and traveling as cheaply as I
could
in order to kind of get it back in my
system, you know, and Making notes?
Making notes. And that that included, of
course, Bombay, but also some parts that
I'd never been to like Benares, for
example. Which I I mean, I had in my
mind some
crude structure of of what would
[snorts] become Midnight's Children and
I wanted to go to places that I thought
might get into the book. And you stood
outside your old childhood home, Yes.
And went inside because we actually I
actually knew the people
to whom my parents had sold the house.
So they welcomed us in and And had been
completely transformed. It looked like a
Bollywood movie set.
>> [snorts]
>> Um but the house was still the house.
And what were you setting out to tell a
big story? No, as I say, it got larger.
It started out wanting I thought I've
just got to write a novel about
childhood, you know.
And then because I you know, I'm
what, 8 weeks
older than the independent nations of
India and Pakistan.
>> [snorts]
>> And at some point it occurred to me
supposing it wasn't an 8-week
difference, you know, supposing it was
the same time.
What did that where did that take you?
And of course where it took you into was
to to have the subject of the history of
of the independent nations being a part
of the story. Yeah. So it became a much
much bigger book. And of course the
family is deeply uh for your own family
is deeply affected by this, our family,
because I realized as I put the
chronology together in my head that you
know, your mother with you as a newborn
is in Bombay and her two sisters are
sort of trying to get from similar to
Delhi and eventually to Pakistan. So
you're born at a time of tremendous
rupture of different kinds. Yes, I mean
[snorts] and like many
Indian Muslim families
the family was more or less cut in half.
Uh so so my mother and my uncle Hamid
and my uncle Mahmood all stayed in
India.
And
my mother's two sisters you know, were
in Pakistan. Yeah. So I mean when we
were little children
and where it wasn't there were moments
where it was easier to travel between
India and Pakistan than than than it is
now.
There used to be these these
little boats that went from Bombay to
Karachi.
Real sort of
not very grand boats. Um
called [snorts] Sabarmati and Saraswati.
Um
and you used to be able to take the boat
cuz actually Bombay to Karachi is not
very far
uh as the crow flies, you know, it's
like a day and a night on a on a tin pot
boat.
>> [snorts]
>> And so we would go every so often um
more to Karachi than to than to where
your family was in Rawalpindi.
>> [snorts]
>> But so there was more interchange
between India and Pakistan at that time.
Was
India then the home of your childhood,
the country of your childhood
effectively then taken away from you
when your parents moved to Pakistan in
the '60s?
>> Yeah, I mean I was very cross with them
for selling the house in Bombay.
Why did they Why did they leave India?
>> I'd never understood it.
I mean they said amongst other things
that they wanted their daughters to have
Muslim husbands, which was very odd
given how lacking in religious faith
particularly my father had always been.
So I I don't I never really got to the
bottom of it and I don't think they were
that
content after moving to Karachi.
Cuz they had a very nice life in Bombay,
which is puzzles me that they left.
Um
and I felt I had to get it back. You
know, there was there was a point after
after leaving Cambridge and
and
deciding to base myself in London to try
and be a writer
that I felt that I was in danger of
losing touch.
And that's why I went on that long
journey
uh of several months.
Uh and
and that led to Midnight's Children and
that I felt you know, I always told
myself that Bombay is a city
a lot of it is built on land reclaimed
from the sea. You know, the British had
a big land reclamation project where
they joined up the seven islands into
into one peninsula.
And I thought I'm also engaged in an act
of land reclamation.
You know, and that's what that book was.
Did it give you what you were looking
for?
>> It did really. Yeah.
>> [snorts]
>> Yeah, because it's the the reception of
Midnight's Children in India was
wonderful.
You know, and it it gave me
a feeling of you know
belonging again. You did make political
points through it. It was at the end of
the period of the emergency that Indira
Gandhi had brought about and
um
were you
you were intending it as
as that as a critique of India at that
time?
>> As I say, you if you're if you're
writing a book about in which the
character and the country are kind of
twins
you have to write about both the twins,
you know.
And the emergency was a real shock to
many of us, you know, the
the fact that you know, the so-called
world's largest democracy
would would would flirt with
dictatorship.
Um I mean more than flirt actually. The
for a couple of years it was quite
serious.
And so it had to get into the book and I
mean actually I was very worried because
I didn't want the book to end
on that note. I can't end the emergency
in my book if it hasn't ended in real
life.
And then Indira Gandhi called an
election and lost. And I felt really
grateful to her cuz she gave me the end
of the book. Yeah.
Um do you think that as you look back
now uh
as you look at India today
is Indira Gandhi a more benign figure
than you thought she was at the time?
Well, not during the years of the
emergency. I think that was a very dark
time, which is not unlike what's
happening
uh now in its way. Um
but I mean she was a more
impressive figure, I think, you know.
Um
and of course she had a
important comeback, you know, she
regained
uh power after some years. So No, I mean
she's an extraordinary woman, you know,
and
I remember
if you know, as I say, when Midnight's
Children came out it was very well
received that if there was any criticism
of it
some people felt that the ending was too
pessimistic.
And now looking back at it, I think the
ending was absurdly optimistic. Compared
to what's happened since?
>> Compared to what's actually happened
since then.
>> So how do you feel about India today
under Prime Minister Modi?
>> I feel very worried about it, you know,
because um
I mean I have a lot of friends in India
who who are journalists and who who from
whom I get
interesting information about what's
going on.
And and I think everybody is extremely
concerned with the attack on freedoms.
Um
of journalists, of writers, of
intellectuals, of professors, you know,
etc. There is a
even beyond that, there seems to be a
desire to rewrite the history of the
country.
You know, um
essentially to say Hindus good, Muslims
bad.
Um and
the thing that V.S. Naipaul once called
a wounded civilization, the idea that
India is a Hindu civilization wounded by
the arrival of Muslims. Invaders.
Invaders.
Um
that project has a lot of energy behind
it. There's a lot of press I was looking
at this book Imaginary Homelands, which
is your uh
criticism and essays written through the
1980s and first published in 1991. And
you do warn about a lot of things that
have become more extreme ever since.
Yeah, I think you know, if if if you're
as a writer, if you're paying attention
>> [snorts]
>> then sometimes you see things coming.
You know, and and I think that's what I
was doing. I was paying attention.
What about the the people in your life
because I know that
obviously Midnight's Children is a work
of fiction, but you you draw on
the structure of your real of your true
family
>> father was very annoyed.
He was not the only one, I think. Others
closer to me were pretty upset or felt
you'd been unfair. Uh my mother was very
very calm about it. She said, "Oh yes, I
can see this what's happening here, but
this is not me and this is not your my
father my husband and
it's all made up." So actually my my
mother had a very good literary response
to it and other people in the family not
so much. Did you mind that or were you
because you're also basking in the
massive adulation that you had in that
period?
>> Yes, cuz I minded it. There's a
there's a famous sentence by the Nobel
laureate Czesław Miłosz uh who said,
"When [snorts] a when a writer enters
the family, the family is screwed."
And [snorts] that was you. And that was
me.
>> [laughter]
>> Um
Bombay is there in the 11th hour as
well, particularly in the story The
Musician of Kahani, The Musician of
Stories.
And there's a part in it where you you
do the writer's version of breaking the
fourth wall where you talk about your
own childhood home and
and there's an allusion as well to the
main character in Midnight's Children.
>> Yes, he makes a little guest appearance.
So
tell me what's going on, what leads to
that? Is it is it a flight of fancy at
the time you're you're writing?
>> No, what what I thought one of the
things about that story is that it felt
to me like a
like a kind of farewell.
Um
from me to
a neighborhood which has been very
important in my writing, you know. It's
not only Midnight's Children actually,
there's a in my novel Kishot, one of the
major characters has a back story in the
same neighborhood.
>> Is it bigger than a farewell to the
neighborhood that you grew up in? Is it
more like a farewell to India?
I don't know the answer to that, you
know, I mean I
I'm very
reluctant to predict what I'm going to
write in the future because every time
I've ever done it I've been wrong.
You know, if I say, "Oh, I'm never going
to write about India again." then you
might find a 600-page novel about India
following.
So I don't know, but it felt like
a conclusion of a certain
concern, you know, and
and
I liked it that I found a story which
wasn't about me to tell, but to tell it
as a way of saying
that's enough
from that place. I meant more in real
life. Can you visit? Do you want to
visit?
>> I mean, I hope to go. I haven't been
since before the pandemic. There was the
pandemic and then there was the attack
and that's
slowed things down. But, yeah, I'm
hoping to go. And do you feel you can
visit safely?
We'll find out.
Of course, the first time your life
everything about your daily life changed
significantly with your writing was
after The Satanic Verses in 1989. And
when you wrote your memoir of that time
you wrote it in the third person as if
what's happening is happening to someone
else.
>> Yes.
Was that a conscious effort to distance
yourself?
>> what I felt was that by the time I got
round to writing it, it was quite a few
years after the events that that are
described in the book.
And and what I felt was that the person
writing the book
and the person about whom the book was
written were in slightly different
places in their lives. You know, that
that that the person about whom the book
was being written was
you know, under great stress and and was
in all kinds of
personal and political difficulty.
And the person writing the book was in a
better place, you know, and um
So, I just thought that it's not
although they're both me
they're not quite the same me.
And so, that was
one of the reasons for the third person.
And the other was I wanted the book to
read like a novel.
Which which was your your forte. Yeah,
and I think if you're writing a
um a memoir or an autobiography
the character called I
has a kind of significance that the
other characters don't. You know.
And I thought if I take away the I and
if I refer to the the me character
in the same language as all the other
characters, then it brings that
character down to the same level as the
other characters and then it reads like
a novel.
So, that those were the reasons. But
then by the time I got round to writing
Knife
that felt very personal. I felt that had
to be a first-person book. Yeah. It's
interesting to me that so after the time
of the
uh of the fatwa and the fact that your
life changes overnight when you have to
go into hiding and you're under British
police protection, that the you're still
writing, but you're throwing you're
continuing to write fiction. You're not
writing about your real life so
>> No, but I was keeping a journal which
which I don't I I've not in my life been
a journalist, you know, a journal
keeper.
Um unlike some writers I know who are
very detailed journal keepers.
But just in those years I thought that
these events were so powerful and they
were things moved so rapidly or so much
going on
that I thought there's no way I'm going
to remember this.
I'm not going to remember like the
daily-ness of it.
And so, I need to keep a record. So, I
was keep So, I did have, you know,
hundreds and hundreds of pages of
journal
that I kept for that almost a decade.
>> Tell me if I'm wrong, but I feel like
the the decade before the fatwa
your non-fiction is a lot about
India and Pakistan and about race
relations and and so much of what you're
seeing around you which you're doing
alongside your fiction. And then of
course
after the fatwa
you've become much more associated with
the cause of free speech because of the
price that you've paid for yours.
>> Yeah, I think that's right.
How do you How do you feel about you
know, when you look around with free
speech, how do you feel about it today?
>> [laughter]
>> I Well,
is it even more challenged or is the
right to it even more challenged than it
was in 1989 when the fatwa was put on
you?
>> there's Yeah, I think there there's
unexpected amounts of pressure on on
free expression and and
on people to restrain themselves from
certain kinds of speech and so on. And
and the pressure comes I think
I mean, historically the pressure on on
free speech comes from conservative
forces in in society
who disapprove of less conservative
voices.
But now it comes from the other end as
well.
Um there are people who are willing to
as it would as they say deplatform
voices that they don't like. You know,
whereas
my kind of old-school view is
that the defense of free speech begins
when somebody says something you don't
like.
You know, because it's actually
perfectly easy to defend people who you
agree with or to whom you're
indifferent. Exactly that is in such
short supply now. The not the the I can
barely Most people who are defenders of
free speech just really want their own
speech defended.
>> And that's that's the opposite of free
speech.
You know, um
I mean, I
over the years I've Yes, I've been
involved in quite a lot of free speech
issues and and very often you find
yourself defending things you don't like
at all.
You know. But do you have to be careful
then not to be co-opted too much when
you realize that some of the people who
want you to rally behind them are
actually only interested in one kind of
free speech?
>> Yeah, well, you Yes, it's
the the battle is not it's not easy, you
know, it's a complicated battle.
And you have to be on on your guard, but
the the general principle I think has to
be
that this
if there's a pressure to censor
something, the censor has to make the
case. The default setting has to be the
freedom. freedom.
Um and you know, the different countries
set the limit in different places. So,
so for example, here
in the UK
>> in the UK because of the Race Relations
Act there are certain kinds of speech
which are forbidden, racist speech.
Whereas in America
because of the First Amendment much of
the speech that would be forbidden under
the Race Relations Act is permitted.
You know, so different countries draw
the you know, there are European
countries which outlaw
uh Holocaust denial.
And there are other countries which
think that that's a mistake.
But [snorts] the US which is your home
now, do you see a different climate on
free speech even there?
>> Yeah, I mean, the writers' organization
PEN America
a couple of few weeks ago
issued a report
in which it said that at this moment in
the United States there are 23,000
active book bans.
And in many cases in schools
one parent objecting to the presence of
a book on the syllabus or in the library
can result in having that book removed.
23,000.
And there is
And these are not just any old books,
you
These [snorts] are Toni Morrison's
Beloved or Huckleberry Finn or To Kill a
Mockingbird.
You know, some of the best books ever
written.
And there is a back a fight back against
it because
there is the defense of the First
Amendment. And so, there's a lot of
court cases and in many cases that's
those court cases are succeeding, but
there's just a lot to fight about. There
have been a series of elections to
school boards across America.
And in every single case the book
banners have been swept off the board
and and and more liberal people have
come on it, you know, so so there is a
backlash against the book bans. And
hopefully that will prevail. But the
fact that they
have come in at all, could you ever have
imagined that in the US cuz you made the
country your home for 25 years, I think.
>> 26 now, yeah. But no, I would never have
imagined it because
one of the reasons why people like me
wanted to live in America is because of
the the fact that free speech is
enshrined in the Constitution. I mean,
the First Amendment is very powerful.
And in that in a country of that kind
that this should happen. And especially
what you begin to notice is that the
many of the books that are being banned
have something in common.
Uh which is that they deal with
America seen from the perspective of
people who are not white.
You know, if you think about
Beloved or To Kill a Mockingbird I mean
books like that, that that's what they
have in common.
That they tell the story of America from
a different viewpoint.
And and there is in my view clearly an
attempt again to erase
that view. point.
And so, it's more important than just
the fact that this or that title that
you happen to be fond of is banned. It's
a question of what what would happen to
a generation of children
if they grow up
ignorant of the history of of the
country. You know, um
that's dangerous. And what
dangerous Dangerous because because
it is a very plural society.
A very diverse society.
And if all you hear is the is one
version which is the version of the
dominant race
then that's potentially very
destabilizing.
It is New York which you've made your
home. And New York now has a new
mayor-elect who I think you must know
because you've worked with his mother
Mira Nair.
>> Well, I I I haven't worked with Mira,
but I've known her a long time.
Yes, so I Yes, I see
>> of Midnight's Children was hers?
>> No, it was Deepa Mehta.
Ah. Oh, it was I thought Mira had has
she not collaborated with you?
>> No, Deepa and Mira have this joke that
they're always congratulating on each
other's films.
>> [laughter]
>> Okay, don't tell them I said this.
But you know Mira Nair.
>> I know Mira, yes. Um
I don't know his father so well, but I
I've met Mahmood as well.
And
I mean, look, he ran
a terrific campaign.
You know, um
he energized young people especially.
And you know, normally in a New York
mayoral election
the voters the percentage of people
voting is not that high. You know.
It's a very democratic city. The
Democrats always wins.
Except Giuliani.
Um
So normally it's kind of boring.
But this was a very energized race. I
think it was the highest percentage of
turnout since about the 1960s.
So he certainly earned it. Do you think
Zohran Mamdani's success is replicable
outside New York City? I don't I don't
think
maybe in certain parts of the country,
but New York is a very particular place.
So I thought what was interesting on the
day that he
won the election to be mayor
was that was that in two other places in
New Jersey and Virginia
women Democrat women
much more centrist than Mamdani
also won by very large margins.
Much larger margins than were expected.
I mean double digit margins.
And
I thought it's unclear which is the
which is the better direction to follow.
You know,
and maybe you don't have to follow one
direction everywhere.
Zohran Mamdani did not resile from his
support for Palestinian rights which
became an issue for some in that
campaign.
Tell me how you feel about that
particular cause today cuz in Imaginary
Homelands there's a long conversation
that you had with Edward Said who you
obviously knew in his lifetime.
Yeah.
Well, look, I mean I still have the view
that the
two-state solution is the solution, but
question is whether anybody there
believes in that anymore.
You know, I think I think neither
Netanyahu nor Hamas
were that interested in a two-state
solution.
But Hamas is not all the Palestinian
people.
>> not.
And
the question is how do we get out of
this
dreadful situation and move towards
something that has some some kind of
justice in it. And
and I don't know the answer to that
because
the Palestinian Authority
isn't supported by a lot of
Palestinians.
Hamas I think has perhaps lost support
amongst a lot of Palestinians.
Um
So I mean who do you negotiate with?
And who does the negotiating?
And back to the free speech side in this
country in the UK today you can't hold
up a sign saying I support Palestinian
Palestine action without being arrested.
What do you think of Well, I guess
>> of making that a
essentially making it a terrorist group.
>> I think that's probably a mistake.
You know, I mean I my view is always
been
let voices be heard. You know,
even if I as I say
more or less especially if I disagree
with them.
You know.
Because as I was saying it's no it's no
trick to allow somebody to hold up a
placard that you agree with.
You know, um
and I mean I was I was surprised the
last the last time I was in England
which was some months ago now.
>> [snorts]
>> There was this huge demonstration in
London of 150,000 people marching
against immigration. The United Kingdom
rally. Yeah, and I thought
I couldn't believe that that was
happening in England.
So
I think there is a
destabilization here as well as in as
well as in America. So it's yeah, it's a
very worrying time. Well, what how does
that leave you feeling because we're
talk we've talked about
India, the United Kingdom and the United
States and you're
disquieted by
by what's happening in all three
countries.
>> you know, this book which deals with all
three countries
I mean writing it I was aware of the
fact that there were echoes
of not they're not exactly the same
situation. You know, they all have their
local differences.
Um [snorts]
but there are echoes between all three
societies of what's going on.
And
I mean not to my liking. This is
sometimes the world
moves in a direction that's not to your
liking. And all you can do is hope that
it'll change.
And I mean in in America there is
there are some small indications that
it'll change.
And as I was saying that in the various
votes that there have been
there's been an enormous swing away from
what what one might call Trumpism.
And then you yourself with a book tour
for your most recent book, what what
comes next? Are you writing again or
will you take a breath before your next?
>> No, you know, I'm always happier when
I'm writing than when I'm not.
You ask anybody who knows me I'm much
better company when I have a book to
write.
Um
I have I would I would hope that the
next thing will be a novel.
And [snorts] I have a germ of something
that I've started work on, but I really
don't know where it's going yet.
I have I think I know what it's about,
but I don't know how to do it yet. Does
that mean you haven't yet sat down with
the empty
laptop screen in front of you?
>> got some I've got some stuff. I've got
you know, I've got some pages, but I'm
not sure about them. And what is your
routine like? Do you are you are you
disciplined? Is it like this is my
writing time and this is my personal
time?
>> actually what's happened to me over
these this as you say this half century
um [snorts] is that I've become very
disciplined.
And and now I do it like a job.
And I I I'm not one of those writers who
can get up at dawn
and work. You know, I'm not very good
early in the morning. So I get up in the
morning at a sort of ordinary time and I
have my coffee and I go to work.
And I do a day's work.
And I am very disciplined and now I
think, you know.
I mean one of the great there's a funny
line of Hemingway
was once asked about literary
commitment, you know, by which the
interviewer meant political commitment.
And Hemingway said the only commitment a
writer needs is the commitment of the
seat of his pants to the seat of his
chair.
And I think that's very important
sitting down.
Um you can't I mean there are writers
who work standing up, but but mostly
mostly you sit down.
But is any of that more difficult
because you have had life-changing
injuries? You've lost the sight in one
eye. I know you have problems with the
other one and your hand your neck were
damaged in the attack. Yeah, it's
difficult. I mean I'm clumsier.
You know, I
I make more
typing mistakes.
Et cetera. Everything is a bit harder,
but
but you know, writing is hard anyway.
So so it's just a different problem. And
how do you cope with the solitude
required? Do you
the the locking yourself away
to work? Is it Well, I've got you know,
I have I've got a very nice work room to
work in.
And I shut the door.
And come out when you've got to a
certain number of words.
>> Yes, I always give myself
an artificially low number of words.
That's the cheat.
So that you can exceed it.
>> Yes, exactly. So what is the daily total
then? Well, if I could get a couple of
hundred words done I would think that's
not bad.
I mean a page is usually 300 and a bit.
You know, 320 something like that.
If I can do that I'm extremely pleased.
But you know, Flaubert used to come down
from his study and say he had a great
day today. He wrote a sentence.
So
>> [laughter]
>> so writing is
sometimes slow, sometimes quick. I mean
with these books
Knife and The Eleventh Hour
I was quite surprised by how
fluently they came out.
You know, that they they neither of them
took I mean they came out at one year
intervals, you know, and
for me that's some kind of a record, you
know, and I've there's quite often I've
taken 5 years to write
So it seems I'm getting faster in my old
age.
Salman Rushdie, good luck with the next
one. Thank you.
>> [music]